From Hanselman it's dot com
it's Hansel minutes or weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lauren's Ryan
announcing show number one 17
recorded live Wednesday, June 4th, 2008. Support
for Hanselman it's is provided
by tellering rad controls, the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com and by
the code better blog network,
delivering tried and true solutions
to real world problems for
building better software online@covidbetter.com. Support
is also provided by DACA
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks internationalization
with developer Michael Kaplan. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And I'm sitting
here at tech ed with
my friend Michael Kaplan, a
developer in windows international. How's
it going, Michael? Thanks for
sitting down with me. Oh,
pretty good. Glad to do
it now. You don't have
known each other for a
long time. And I think
we ended up meeting because
I commented on your blog
with regards to my interest
in Ethiopian languages, specifically Amharic.
I actually, I think the
first time came up was
that Turkish bug, but the,
the Abigail Actually, what was
interesting about the Turkish book,
cause you know, I'm in
an, I'm interested in internationalization
and you're a full time
developer and internationalization. Why is
the Turkish language so interesting
for Microsoft developers? Unfortunately, it's
most interesting because of the
bug that commonly happens and
that's to do with the
Turkish eye where they have
a dotted uppercase version and
a dateless lowercase version and
they case it the way
you'd expect where the doubtless
and dotted go together. We
don't do that, but it
means that they expect something
totally different, done it framework
supports it well, but it
means all kinds of apps
get broken all the time
because they case something, they
can't find a character later.
I think that your blogging
right, actually broken at one
at one point because of
that or not the whole
thing, but part of it.
And then you, you track
down the bug, you find
the one line of code
that is responsible for bringing
everything down. Right? Exactly. And
a very good example of
that would be say that
you had an application that
was going to check for
the word fail in a
text box and the user
typed in fail F a
I L all lower case
with a, an I with
a dot on it. And
in your code you said
text box dot two upper.
You would get in Turkish
F a capital I with
a dot on it. L
and then you would check
to see if that equals
fail and it wouldn't right.
Your application would fail. Right.
Makes total sense when you
explained that the Turks have
four eyes. Yes, but it
was very, not intuitive, But
all a wonderful things in
the language about vowel harmony
and the way that, the
way that the words flow
together is lost on everybody.
What people remember is that
darn Turkish. Yeah, exactly. But
that's an example of, you
know, you can't test your
application on every single language.
Exactly. What are the languages
someone should pick when they're
trying to get a good
coverage. That's definitely a good
core language to look at
because that's, that's one of
those main bugs Romanian came
up recently as another one
because of letters that they
wanted added that don't exist
in the code page, but
exist in Unicode. So it's
a good way to test
whether or not they're doing
the right thing using, using
Unicode properly. And actually we
were talking about Ethiopic, which
was another interesting case because
there were, there were three
core languages that were scheduled
to be added to Vista
that I felt really strongly
needed to be because they'd
been Unicode for like five
years and I was sick
of waiting. And it was,
There's an example where there
was a language in the
Unicode spec that you felt
visiting to do the support.
Well, the Microsoft hadn't supported
yet, but they could have,
and it was sin Holly's
Mongolian and Ethiopic and sent
Holly is we sort of
got in. We snuck in
because the government wanted to
help us after tsunami. We,
they needed help actually collecting
names and things so that
we did an XP patch
so they could use Sinhalese.
So we knew that was
going in. Cause we had
a font and everything, and
Mongolian they'd done a bunch
of work on an Ethiopic.
They also did a bunch
of work on. Right. And
when you say Ethiopic, you're
referring to what's called the
, which is the Herrick.
Yes. Deliberate Ethiopic I usually
call it, we don't, I
don't know. We, I don't
usually call it either. My
understanding is Ethiopic is a
compromise thing that was done
in the standard for the
standard itself to come up
with a neutral name for
the script that isn't actually
how even native speakers think
of the script, The native
speakers call it the feed.
L a but there's just
as there's the Latin script,
we call it like when
we write English it's or
French or whatever, there's this
Latin script. Cause that's the
root language Ethiopian Amharic, and
the languages of similar languages
have their Latin, which is
called  is the, you
also uses that script. Okay.
So rather than calling it
is or calling it M
hierarchy, you call it Ethiopic
and that's the compromise. Okay.
So the one advantage you
would think of Arabic with
scripted language or the same
people get confused all the
time. So there's an advantage
to having a separate name,
although kind of a made
up name does seem odd.
Well, yeah, but like you're
using, you know, the Indian
language, right. You know, using
the  scripts. Exactly. If
someone who knows about Hindi
and  and Punjabi and
all these other languages wouldn't
necessary, think of Devanagari as
being it doesn't exactly roll
off the tongue. Very true.
Describes the script. So back
to my original question, what
are some languages that I
would pick do I pick,
I mean, people usually say,
well, you know, English, Spanish,
and maybe, but I, you
know, when I was doing
internationalization, I would go Arabic,
Chinese, and then I would
make a pseudo internationalized language
that had, you know, funky
accents and stuff like that.
Yeah. I, I probably wouldn't.
I mean, German is a
common one people use because
it's a good example of
a language that takes up
between 30 and 50% more
space in the dialogues. So
it's a good way to
check for really, for dialogues
that are too tightly spaced
because you want English to
look good, but you don't
want to make the localizer
work too hard. You don't
want to clip stuff either.
Ah, right. That's a very
interesting thing. You're pointing out
that the length of the
string, the leanest thing will
change will change the way
that your pages will. And,
and the English is fairly
wordy too, but German is,
is just more wordy and
German is also a good
one. Cause it's, it's a
tier one language for many
types of marketing, many types
of markets where people are
producing software. So it's a,
it's a good, typical language
to use, right? Then beyond
that, getting into languages with
other internationalization issues, Turkish is
a great one to use
because of the, the various
Turkish issues that happen with
the Turkish. I, I usually
pick Arabic rather than Hebrew.
I like to do one
right to left. Right. An
Arabic has more issues related
to it because Hebrew is
very simple, other than being
a right to, Because it
doesn't have any ligatures. Exactly.
There's no shaping, what's a
ligature. You're combining two letters
together and producing something. It
doesn't look exactly like they
would separate, Right? Like cursive
script in English. Exactly. In
fact, if you look at
all the unit scrap examples
that are on, that are
in MSDN and the platform
instigate don't even mention Arabic,
they give cursive Latin examples
so that people developers actually
can say, Oh, I know
what that is. Instead of
saying Arabic, I don't know
it. So it's actually a
wonderful, it's exactly what we're
talking about. Right? So Arabic
is a cursive by, by
default Because essentially, I mean,
they're there, their block script
is actually a very cursive
script. It's very flowing. It's,
it's actually a beautiful, not,
not the kind of font
you use every day, but
some of the very, the
fancier fonts look like the
way typographers put in and
it's beautiful, but it, it
certainly you find more problems
with Arabic than you would
with Hebrew because they should
right to left. You have
all those shaping things. I
usually like to pick something
like Thai as well, because
Thai has other issues related
to word breaking. And you
want those things to work
well by defaults. And sometimes
they do, but not all
components do so well. In
fact, one of the main
problems with it and it
framework is there are so
many things that are, I
mean, some controls are fully
spaced out in summer, just
thin wrappers around something else.
So you end up with
support that varies and you
can find that one piglet
girl doesn't work with a
script where another one will,
especially when using third party
ones. And so it's, it's
a good tie, becomes a
good test of whether or
not you can handle, you
described things like, Oh, a
unit scribe is the component
in windows that does of
the work to shape any
script that requires extra work
and extra work, any kind
of extra work, whether it's
right to left or checking
for legal sequences, a ligature
formation. So anything that's not
just putting up straight English,
Latin characters pretty much. Huh.
You know, when I was
doing a internationalization, we were
working in banking. We thought
about the German example. And
we thought about, you know,
more complicated examples. One of
the things, one of the
bugs that we wanted to
catch was pushing UTF eight
code all the way through
the system and back and
making sure that as it
moved from web server to
middle tier, from military to
database and back that we
didn't screw something up, we
didn't go turn into black
squares. So testing the system
all the way through to
make sure that something wasn't
lost, Right. And sometimes people
skip my, the Thai case
because Thai has a code
page and they skipped, they
move right into one of
the Indic languages like Hindi,
because then you can test
if anything ever gets into
a code page and you
are using Hindi, you better
hope they speak fluent question
Mark. Cause that's all you
have left by the time
you're done there, We worked
with the bank of Bangkok.
So we learned that really
quickly. And, and, and so
actually for Thai actually, I've,
I've had clients who we've
actually used Laotian. Basically we
usually ocean because it doesn't
have a code page, whereas
Tai does. And it's another
easy way to test for
which is the question marks,
you know? So let's back
up a little bit to
the, to some of the,
some of the basics because
you know, we're both language
geeks and we're both, you
know, Unicode type geeks. But
I think we understand ASCII.
I think that one of
the, one of the demos
I like to do when
I talk to high school
students is I go out
to the command line, I
type copy con food dot
text type, ABC control Z.
And then I go debug
food dot text and I
go and look at it
and we say, all right,
67, 68, 69. Now here's
the characters. So I think
people understand some of the
fundamentals of why is a
67. I'm not sure. 69.
I can never remember 41
and 68. I think, I
think in hexadecimal now. Oh,
you think in hexadecimal, right?
Because you're a full time
developer on this stuff. Okay.
I think in, in, in
base 10, this is going
to be a huge problem
as 65. Yes. I do
those in my head now,
but that's okay. So go
to fewer parties because of
that. So yeah, That is
a problem. So then I
go to like a Yahoo
China and I'll select a
Chinese character and I'll paste
it in notepad, in the
middle of my ABC. And
I'll save it as, as
Unicode with a byte order,
Mark. And then I'll go
out and I'll show people
the buyer Mark. And this
is like that buyer or
Mark is just so, I
mean, I cannot tell you
how many times I've received
an email where someone said,
and I looked and there
were these funny two characters
at the beginning of my
string and suddenly everything looked
bad. What is a bite
order, Mark? When do I
need it? When do I
not? Why is it sometimes
there? Why is it not
sometimes there? Okay. So the
biter Mark is actually was
put in by Unicode as
a good way to indicate
what the text is. And
if when it's UTF is,
is where the most common
use of it was and
UTF 32, I guess, might
be the second, most common.
The idea of being to
Mark what the text is.
And it's interesting because you,
the character is FFF that's
here, it's there. It's also
doubles as a zero with
no break space. And they
decided it was a good
thing to start with because
there's no purpose to having
a zero with no break
space at the beginning of
a text. So if you
see it the very beginning,
then it must be a
bite order Mark. And you
wouldn't see it because you
wouldn't see it anyways because
it's invisible. In fact, it's
amazing many people complain about
the vital order Mark. And
I say, I've never heard
so much complaint about something
that you can't see has
no width yet. You know,
megabytes are written about it.
Certainly you've proven that you
don't, that your system is
not understanding Unicode because if
you ever see the thing
that shows up with a
question Mark and some silly
character, then you're obviously not
displaying your zero with Noah,
you know, zero. I mean,
to this day, most Microsoft
internal developers actually use windows
to do their, their diffing
and it doesn't understand utfh.
So you always see that
byte owner, Mark, anytime they've
saved something as UTF. So
it's a marker, but also
it, it describes It, it
basically, and, and the place
where it's a problem for
people outside of Microsoft, we
sort of led to kind
of our own people criticizing
us. We include the Bider
Mark in UTF as well,
where it's not considered necessary,
but consider it an optional
thing because you don't need
to know the order of
the tests. You don't need
to know whether the binder
Display. It's not just a
marker. It was actually describing
order. Exactly. But in UTMA
theater is always the same
it's byte based, but it's
useful in UCF because if
you go into notepad and
you have just ASCII text
and you save it as
utfh in the dialogue, we
can't, we don't have any
metadata to remember that, but
we do have this bite
order Mark to put in,
but if you load it
up again and you didn't
get what you saved, people
would complain. So we said,
well, let's just add the
byte order, Mark. Unfortunately it
seems, and in our biggest
complaints still comes from people
who write unit shell scripts
in notepad, which is a
market that I don't think
anybody ever imagined Windows. We
know that writing a unit
shell script. Exactly. Okay. And
this sounds like the most
farfetched thing in the world,
but I have hundreds of
emails from people explaining how
common this is. So really
I can't even, Cause I
was thinking to myself when
you were describing that or
marks belong in UTF 16
and UTF 32, I was
like, huh, but I see
them in all my utfh.
Yup. And then you said,
well, Microsoft put it there
and I'm thinking, Oh no.
What did Microsoft do now?
Well, I mean, it, it,
but it sounds like it
makes sense. It does make
sense. It's just that it
doesn't make sense from a
standpoint of people who support.
Utfh not for the characters,
but just because it happens
to work. Yeah. And when
you look at something like
a unit shell script, there
are, there's a specific protocol
that you have to start
with and it doesn't include
starting with these other characters.
So it causes them problems.
So people spend Their time
in whatever their native language
is and it just works.
And when things get, when
things go wrong, it's when
they switch over and they
start to localized things. I
actually, I worked with a,
a bank in Israel and
they were not familiar with
internationalization and it seemed to
me, and this was such
an ethnocentric way of me
to think. And I was
like, how can they not
be familiar with international they're
international? Well, of course they're
not, they're domestic, you know,
relative to Israel, but they,
it just worked for them.
But when you start inserting
other languages, you make it
a truly globalized multi-lingual system.
And you mix things, particularly
when you're mixing right to
left and left to right
in the same exact text
file. Things started to get
really interesting. That's something we
still do poorly. I think,
I mean, it's interesting Hebrew
itself has some elements that
are left to right. Basically
numbers. And they certainly have
some English texts. And as
a rule, those things work
well, what doesn't work well
is when you actually have
Hebrew texts, you're kind of
inserting in English, like as
an example or vice versa.
We're very poor with that.
Like true. Bi-directional poor. In
what sense, Portland dense, you
can't really ever hope to
copy paste a sample and
have the same, have it
look the same wherever you
paste it, you have to
worry about the machine you're
on effecting the underlying thing.
I mean, there are markers
you can put in that
have, that will strongly decide
stuff that we never add.
Yeah. I've had that happen
before when doing samples where
I'll, I'll grab like an
Arabic headline and I'll successfully
copy it and I'll paste
it into some application. That's
just not the most clever
application. And I'll look at
it. And I don't, I
have, I took Arabic in
college, but I've forgotten at
all, but I know enough
to say that doesn't look
like a word. Yep. And
it's often ends up being
wrong and things have been
flipped around. Yeah. And, and
there's we, I mean, our
story could definitely be better
here. It's a very difficult
problem to solve. Well, I
mean, in practice, it's actually
easy because I, I go
under simple principle. I believe
that a computer program should
be able to work as
well as an eight year
old would be able to
work in eight year olds.
And as I think our
computers are toddling yet, well,
they're, they're not smart enough
to do this yet, but
an eight year old who's
looking at the tax can
tell you what, what order
things should be in. So
when I look at, if
I look at an MQI
system for windows, a multilingual
user interface, and I look
at the list of languages
that are in the native
scripts. And I look at
the fact that in Arabic,
all of the scripts that
have parentheses in them, on
their lists, like you have
a Well Arabic Morocco, Arabic,
We have one, one that's
actually on the list like
a Chinese simplified, Chinese traditional,
the Arabic where basically all
the prints, these get flipped.
So they're look wrong. And
I think even an eight
year old looks at that
and knows that it's wrong
and can describe the problem.
And I think anytime the
eight year old can describe
it, the computer should figure
it out. Well, that's the
thing though. I mean, an
eight year old can describe
that, that it feels wrong
or that they're there because
the human brain has such
a great pattern matcher that
you can notice that this
is wrong. Are those kerning,
that bit of kerning is
wrong, right? But in this
case, how do you write
an algorithm to figure that
out In this case? I
mean, the simple rule is
we basically put in, see
the print, the problem is
the parentheses are considered neutral.
So they take whatever surrounding
them. But if in the
case where you have it's
right to left overall, Okay.
So I have a sentence
that's right to left. No,
no, no. That the system
is right to left systems,
but in this case you
happen to have a bit
of Chinese which has left
or right in the middle
of it. Okay. You want
the left or right to
control. You don't want the
Arabic to inter to intervene
on any of the, the
texts in the middle. Okay.
So you want to put
a marker in front of
that neutral character to say,
this is left to right.
And we have those characters.
In fact, if you call
the get date format function,
there's a flag you can
put in that says, insert
those characters. So, okay. We
do that stuff, but we
do not have it automatically.
And it seems like at
the display level, it should
be something to just notice
the context. And, and we're
smart enough to know, to
write the algorithm for this.
Right. It's just that nobody
really wants to jump in
and do it. That's a
difficult thing. I mean, the
idea that, you know, we
work for the 99% case,
but you know, you never
know when someone might be
writing Arabic and wants to
include a Chinese character and
think about all the Cartesian
products of different combinations of
things that someone could potentially
want to do. You know,
someone's doing Tamel and Ethiopian
side by side and it
doesn't work. You know, how
many kinds of obscure bugs
do you get when it's
only two languages that are
combined in some strange way?
Have you seen anything like
that? Well, it's actually what
I like to focus on
specific languages that are kind
of edge cases when you
mix them in. So like
when you do, when you
include Arabic in the mix,
you find a whole class
of bugs because you're putting
Arabic in the world. Whether
you, sometimes I run the
other UI languages. Yeah. This
is interesting actually, before we
get into that in XP,
I remember if I wanted
to go and visit a
Chinese website, I had to
go into the regional settings
under language tools and say,
install East Asian fonts. But
under Vista, to be clear,
everything's just there. Right. Are
there so on any machine,
even moms Vista home, they're
all there. She can go
and start typing Chinese immediately.
Yes. But, but she can't
get the UI in Chinese.
Yeah. The UI requires, that's
an extra thing you include.
If you have ultimate, you
can actually install them directly.
If you don't, then you
can upgrade Was definitely a
decision that I didn't agree
with, which not being able
to have a regular Vista
home have, you know, Albanian
that I agree with. But
I agree with that. So
we both agree that all
versions of Vista should be
able to have whatever language
anyone wants to speak. Yes.
Yeah. Well maybe that'll change,
Know things that were interesting
about it because most people
I've talked to, they have
no problem with, I mean,
they're adding a language, they're
totally, they're doing something extra.
They have no problem with
paying a little extra for
that. But that ultimate, it
seems weird to them. Yeah.
Because I want a home
system. I just happen to
have two people in the
family who speak two different
languages. My mom's a different
language. So why do I
have to buy ultimate in
order to exactly. So it's
it's and people don't mind
paying extra, but they do
mind Two different things here.
There's having any version of,
of Vista. I could buy
French Vista or English Vista,
and I'm going to get
either the English user interface
or the French user interface
on both of those though.
I can immediately start typing
Chinese or even Ethiopian. So
any Vista has got Ethiopian
out of the box. You
just go in and you
enable it as a language.
I can start typing Ethiopian
and notepad. Yes. But if
I want to have a
Chinese start menu or an
Albanian start menu, then I
have to go and get
this. Is it a movie
Or enterprise or ultimate. And
then you, then you have,
okay. The term is multi-lingual
user interface in the movie.
So you use this term
movie. Yeah. Well, I use
MyUI, there's a, there's a
weird, I don't know. Maybe
I'm the only movie guy.
No, no, no, no. Movie
is actually what the team
who owns it, calls it
now, but they're second generation.
And that is so there's
a difference between having an
input language in the sense
of being able to input
this and maybe someone's using
an English or a French
Vista and typing Chinese emails
to grandma versus running the
entire user interface in that
particular way. Yes. In fact,
the list of languages that
are fully translated into translate
into is smaller than the
list of ones you can
actually type stuff into. What
are the numbers? 208 locales
in Vista. And I think
it's four, there's over a
hundred. If you include the
partially localized, the, the language
interface packs that are, those
are Okay. So what's the
difference between a language interface
pack and an a M
UI? Well localization, one thing
they know about it, it's
very expensive. It's very, it's
equally expensive to do it
badly as to do it
well. And I've been doing
localization work for years. My
very first job out of
college was to do English,
Japanese, French on windows three,
one. And one of the
things that I found in
my, in working with international
localization rather is no one
will ever agree with the
translation that the guy picked
Well, it's you, you, I
mean, some people will agree,
but you won't, you'll never
get complete a sense for
any of those things. I'll
tell you how many times
people will. We'll we'll spend
all this money, we'll translate
it into Spanish and I'll
show it to somebody and
go, Oh, we don't say
that here. And actually Spanish
is a fun, politically charged
case because most of the
localization work happens in the
United States is done from Mexican
companies, which, you know, the
CA the pure Casiano people
in the Spaniards don't like
at all. And they can
tell the difference. I find
traditionally, if you, if you
work with, you know, Quebecois,
French, the people in France
don't like it, but they
can't always distinguish. And so
I think they don't always
know the same way. The
Spanish can definitely help because
there's so many dialect type
differences that you could spot.
All right. Let's just, this
is a great discussion. Let's
take a, just a brief
moment and thank our sponsors
and we'll be right back.
Do you know how to
make the possible out of
the impossible? Well, the dotnet
ninjas at Telerik do they
just released a huge pack
of web controls, all built
on top of ESPN at
Ajax, that'll help you build
impossibly fast and interactive applications
in no time at all.
They've made the impossible possible
in desktop development. If you
think you can't have a
carousel component and wind forms,
well, you can. They're windows
form suite features a super
powerful grid, view control, and
32 other crazy desktop components.
That'll give you a dazzling
WPF like features, but in
wind farms, they do the
same thing in reporting solutions
with a new design surface,
like nothing else looks just
like graph paper gives you
advanced page layout capabilities makes
it feel more like a
graphic design software than a
reporting solution. Go check them
out@telerik.com and be at dotnet
Ninja. And thanks for listening.
This week's Hansel minutes is
brought to you by code
better.com the code better.com blog
network it's made up of
over 20 industry leaders and
speakers who are passionate about
delivering tried and true solutions
to real world problems for
building better software. These guys
are not only our sponsor
this week, but they're also
my friends. The COVID better
blog network. It's where industry
leaders blog. You can find
them@codebetter.com as well as devilish
S T E V L
I C I O dot
U S. So I'm sitting
here talking about internationalization and
localization issues with Michael Kaplan
from windows international. And yeah,
I've definitely found when doing
translation work, that people are
very passionate about the words
that you use. And they're
very frustrated when things don't
either look or feel exactly
right. You pick the wrong
word and you can alienate
an entire group. I understand
that they had to change
the time zone map inside
of what was the deal
with that I haven't been
in. Well, there was a
huge windows, 95 scandal. And
this was when the, the
lines were removed from the
map. And it just became
this amorphous shapes of, of
landmasses that was safer than
trying to draw lines because
not everybody agrees with the
lines, right? People were disagreeing
with the way, the time
zone, because it was outlining
the edge of their country.
Exactly. Which they may have
been. And when it's in
dispute, I mean, you can't,
you can't talk about places
like cashmere and things like
that, and not have somebody
unhappy with the choice you've
made. In fact, one of
the things that's hard about
being Microsoft is they're languages
that we can't support because
of those things directly, really
like what? Well, we can't
do cashmere for example, because,
well, because you can't call
it cashmere, cashmere, cause some
people really feel like they
own it. And you can't
pick one of those places
because the people who feel
they own it disagree with
each other about which parts
they own. So what do
you call it a, well,
we can't call it anything
because anything we'd call it
would lead to somebody else
being offended and people go
to war over, stuff like
that. And they'd use as
proof that they are the
winner of an argument. So
does this mean that basically
everyone who speaks cashmere and
wants to run windows just
lose, loses out? Well, they
don't lose that. They lose
out on the, they lose
on our being in the
box. I mean, we, we
don't have a font built
in. I see. And get
it. They can get a
font. Oh, wow. I see.
So like, this is interesting
because when I was doing
Ethiopian work, writing menus for
local Ethiopian restaurants, windows didn't
support it. So I would
go find the font because
some Intrepid Ethiopians would go
and build a font from
scratch. Right. And we'd out
a way to like type
it in and people would
write custom IMS input, method
editors. So I assume we
could probably look around on
the web and find if
there's a language that windows
doesn't support, there may be
a font. Yes. And, and
that's the other thing that
comes interesting. When people talk
about us supporting a language
they're often talking about, they
want everything there. They want
the locale, they want the
sorting, they want the font,
you know, the, the whole
package, we kind of think
the same way where, and,
and this actually gets back
a long way back. But
I was very concerned about
Ethiopic about MRX specifically, because
I really felt strongly we
needed it in, but there
was some concern because we
kept getting promised the input
method by the vendor we
were working with, that we
were going to have. This
is a really important note
that you've got your font
and you just called out
your locale. And you're sorting
with the input method editor.
We've got all of these
keyboards that have, you know,
mostly English characters on them.
And you can certainly buy
Japanese keyboards and you can
buy Arabic keyboards, but Ethiopic
Herrick. The fetus has got
something like 236 characters. It's
not an alphabet. It's a
syllabary. And they, they need
a input method that actually
will work. That's intuitive for
them. And we were promised
this, that it would work.
We could do it with
them as they claimed we
could do with ms. Kelsey,
they're going to have it
any day. Obviously the keyboard
layout creator, which just built
center keyboards. And I, at
the time didn't really know
to differ with them, but
it turns out then the
vendor kind of disappeared. That
was kind of a minor
snafu. We were worried that
we would have to pull
out all of it because
we can't say we support
a locale and not let
you type in it. Right.
And I was morally and,
and technologically in every sense,
opposed to taking it out.
Cause I said, you know,
this is one of those
scripts. That's been there for
a long time. We have
no business waiting. So I
pushed really hard on a
different technology, which was being
used because people found that
creating IMS was very complicated.
Okay. So if I wanted
to make Scott language or
cling on, if I want
clean on support and I
want an IME for cling
on, I would have to
go and write a bunch
of code. Right. And, and
that they, I mean, there's
hundreds of interfaces. There are
no good samples. It's very
hard to do. I mean,
people have done it, but
it's incredibly hard. Okay. And
because of that in Vista,
they created a text based
system that would wrap the
hard stuff and you create
a text file with the
core information that's needed. Everything
else would happen automatically. Sounds
cool. So I said, you
know, maybe we could use
this and just build one.
They built something for Amharic.
So we went through and
I, so I worked out
the technological issues, which was
easy because I had another
language. So I didn't have
anything that would be useful
for a native speaker yet,
but I said, okay, so
we can actually do this.
And we're playing with the
settings, what we need. So
we started kind of trolling
around, looking for experts in
the language who would be
able to give us a
big list that amounts to,
if I type this letter
or these letters, this is
what I want. Right. And
this wouldn't just be any
old, random Ethiopian guy on
the street. This would be
someone who knows the language.
Yeah. We want something. We
want a native speaker. We
want, I mean, I've, I've
written keyboards, even for governments
where they're, where they're transcribing
information, the keyboard they would
use is very different than
what a native speaker would
need. So we want people
who, just whatever they'd intuitively
inspect we've in the end,
it turned out that what
we did was fairly intuitive
because we've had external people
actually say that it was
very quick for them to
do. Most of the guesses
were what they were expecting.
Right. And one of the
things that's interesting about a
bet Ethiopian is of course
in English, you've got five
vowels, Ethiopia, and you've got
seven and there's this non
vowel. So, and it's a
syllabary. And when Ethiopians learned
to say their alphabet, they
don't, they don't sing ABC.
Like we do. They sing
who he ho . And
if it's they go on
this grid and it's the
syllables and they go, you
know, the first column is
law and it is the
Oz example. And then the
second column is the Lu
Ashley and people who speak
Japanese would be familiar with
that kind of stuff. If
you know, Katakana, or then
you would feel comfortable or,
or Hebrew, you would feel
comfortable in it in Ethiopian.
Cause Ethiopian is actually an
Afro Semitic language. And when
they type it, if you
were going to type haha,
you would type H a
but there's actually two Haas.
So you have to know
which one is which Todd
did you mean? Because they
both sound like ha but
the, a, the vowel is
a different vowel, right. And
it's subtle. So then you
have to pick, and we
only have five hours to
pick from on the keyboards.
You have to pick another
one. So there was a
keyboard that there was a
program that was called GEZ
pro on windows 3.1. And
that was the first custom
input metadata method editor. And
it was basically a custom
Ethiopian notepad, only it only
typed Ethiopian. And it only
worked with this one font.
And then you would basically
type your Ethiopian script in
this editor, which was an
edit all in one editor
IME. And then you would
copy paste your, your, your,
your work into, into word
and visual basic three at
the time did not support
any, anything internationalized. So people
would create, but it, interestingly
it did at runtime, but
the designer didn't. So what
would happen is you would
re you would go and
you'd say, I want a
label that says first name,
and you would write it
in, in American goes pro
you put it in the
clipboard, you'd paste it into
designer. It would show up
as black squares, you'd hit
F five and you'd run
visual basic. And then it
would show up and look
correct. And that's, that's still
a way that many Ethiopian
developers work today, which is
very scary, which is really
pretty bad. And, and, but
still some of that's today.
In fact, I was actually
talking to, I'm doing a
panel later on SQL server.
And I was talking to
my person I'm doing with,
they were asking me why
it was that in the
results pane of, you know,
when they're, when they're running
queries, they were able to
see any language. But in,
in the actual, when they're
typing it, they just see
square boxes. Right. And we,
we kind of went through
and I showed them what
was going on. And it's
just, you know, some metal
controls don't support particular languages
or things. And, but they
were just floored. The, some
things work perfectly and other
things just don't work at
all. Exactly. Exactly. So an
input method editor, they would
type H and then they
would get a combo box,
like an autocomplete. It would
pop down and it would
show them, here are the
things that you might want.
Exactly. And as you're continuing
to type, that list gets
smaller. Okay. So this is
a list of candidates, Basically
the end. And that's literally
what it's called. It's called
the candidate list for IMTS
and basically ha and in
our case, we had basically
an H lowercase, a and
H uppercase, a for the
two different letters that were
there and that that's, you
know, what, we ended up
choosing the technology itself, doesn't
distinguish them. Right. So basically
it just shows the two
in the same candidate list,
but maybe there were some
other letter that would be
hae or something like that.
So you actually maybe have
more candidates as well. Eventually
you just get down to
one or two and then
you basically choose one and
you're there. The typing is
very fast, although it'd be
faster if we told the
difference between those two. And
it's interesting to see more
languages with more mature support
like Japanese, you know, in
the, you would use an
IME and you could type
like Domar I got don't,
you it's like D O
and then pick a character.
Oh. And it would pick
a character. But for some
people, when the tablet PC
came out, it was faster
to just draw it because
they would just draw the
stroke and that would provide
a candidate. So then there
was that tablet, PC based,
Japanese IME, Well, people enjoyed
a lot more. And really
all it requires is some
work on the actual hindering
recognition side, which is easier
for some languages than others,
but also requires the effort
and Great about that. And
what's so interesting about it
from a Japanese perspective is
that stroke order is important,
right? In, in, in the
U S you can draw
a, an a, and it
doesn't matter which, which side
of the AAU pick, or
if you draw the middle
part first, there's no concept
of that. But that stroke
order can provide a way
to narrow down your candidates.
Well, and although in English,
I mean, I I've, I
was told, and I certainly
did very poorly in pinion
penmanship going to school because
for example, Oh, you're supposed
to start at the top
of the, of the circle,
says, who, okay. Says the
teacher now I have always,
and to this day, still
start from the right. That's
just what I do. And
on the right of the
circle, I have no idea
why it's just what I
do, but I used to
get in trouble because you
always end up with, you
see the residual, you see
some little tiny thing. And
so I'd always get marked
off because of my own
that were, And apparently 30
years later, you're still deeply
bitter about this. I'm a
little bitter about it. And
I think that even though
you failed handwriting that you're
doing so well and internationalization,
I think is the best
revenge is living well. Exactly.
Well, thanks so much for
sitting down with me today,
Michael. I really appreciate it.